

--- PAGE 1 ---
Scaling In-Context Online Learning Capability of
LLMs via Cross-Episode Meta-RL
Xiaofeng Lin1∗ Sirou Zhu2∗ Yilei Chen1 Mingyu Chen1 Hejian Sang2
Ioannis Paschalidis1 Zhipeng Wang2 Aldo Pacchiano1
Xuezhou Zhang1†
1Boston University, Boston, MA 2LinkedIn, Sunnyvale, CA
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) achieve strong performance when all task-relevant
information is available upfront, as in static prediction and instruction-following
problems. However, many real-world decision-making tasks are inherently online:
crucial information must be acquired through interaction, feedback is delayed,
and effective behavior requires balancing information collection and exploita-
tion over time. While in-context learning enables adaptation without weight
updates, existing LLMs often struggle to reliably leverage in-context interaction
experience in such settings. In this work, we show that this limitation can be
addressed through training. We introduce ORBIT, a multi-task, multi-episode
meta–reinforcement learning framework that trains LLMs to learn from interaction
in context. After meta-training, a relatively small open-source model (Qwen3-14B)
demonstrates substantially improved in-context online learning on entirely unseen
environments, matching the performance of GPT-5.2 and outperforms standard
RL fine-tuning by a large margin. Scaling experiments further reveal consistent
gains with model size, suggesting significant headroom for learn-at-inference-time
decision-making agents. Code reproducing the results in the paper can be found at:
https://github.com/XiaofengLin7/ORBIT.
1 Introduction
Humans are remarkable learners. While we are far from omniscient, we can often acquire new skills
rapidly: a few rounds of trial and error, combined with memory and reasoning, frequently suffice
to discover effective strategies in a new game, interface, or problem domain. The capability to use
interaction experience to improve behavior over time constitutes a fundamental aspect of intelligence.
In contrast, online learning remains a fundamental challenge for large language models (LLMs).
Despite their impressive in-distribution performance, today’s LLMs typically require substantial
post-training to reliably adapt to new domains and skills. For example, strong coding performance
usually demands explicit training on code, and similarly, domain expertise often follows targeted
fine-tuning on domain data. More broadly, once a model is deployed, it rarely improves on a task
through continued interaction in the way humans do. This “static-after-shipping” property is a major
obstacle for building general-purpose agents that must operate in new environments, recover from
mistakes, and refine strategies as they accumulate experience.
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author: xuezhouz@bu.edu
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2602.04089v1  [cs.AI]  3 Feb 2026

--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 1: Left: ORBITgains over the base model on episode -3 success rate for Maze and Mastermind
(w/ ORBITvs. w/o ORBIT). Right: Average success rate across Maze and Mastermind over
episodes for ORBIT, GPT -4o, GPT-5.2 (high reasoning effort), and the oracle algorithms for the test
environment (details in Appendix C) Both tasks are unseen during training.
While true continual learning through weight updates remains an open problem, a promising alterna-
tive isin-context learning(ICL), where a model adapts to new information using only its context
window. First highlighted in GPT-3 [2], ICL shows that pretrained LLMs can condition on demon-
strations and feedback without parameter updates. However, the settings that matter for autonomy
are not static input–output prediction: they require learning a decision strategy from sequential
experience. In partially observed, interactive tasks, an agent must explore to acquire information,
perform credit assignment, and then exploit what it has learned, all while thetraining signalarrives
as delayed feedback from the environment. Empirically, even frontier models struggle to reliably
exploit in-context experience to perform effective online decision making in such settings (Fig. 1),
suggesting that strong language modeling alone does not yield robustin-context online learning.
To make this concrete, we focus on a particular online learning regime that arises naturally in practice.
An agent is deployed to solve an unfamiliar task, such as navigating a new interface, operating in an
unknown environment, or interacting with a system whose rules are not fully specified upfront. On its
first attempt, the agent may act sensibly yet fail due to hidden constraints or incomplete understanding.
Importantly, the task itself does not change: the agent is typically given multiple chances to try again,
each starting from a fresh initial state but governed by the same underlying dynamics. A competent
learner should therefore treat early attempts as opportunities to gather information and use what it
has observed to improve behavior in later ones. We refer to this regime asmulti-episode in-context
online learning, where adaptation must occur across repeated trials of the same task using only the
interaction history stored in the context window, without updating model parameters.
This paper asks a simple question:
Can we endow LLMs with general-purpose in-context online learning capability?
We answer this in the affirmative by presenting ORBIT, a simple yet effectivemulti-task, multi-episode
meta–reinforcement learningframework that enables LLMs to perform in-context online learning
in unseen tasks. The key idea is to meta-train a pretrained LLM across a diverse distribution of
decision-making environments and across multiple episodes per task to maximize long-term reward,
for which active information collection becomes a must. In this training setup, the model is not
rewarded merely for solving a single instance; it is rewarded forlearning to learn within context.
Early interaction must be used to gather task-relevant information and reduce uncertainty, while later
interaction must exploit this information to achieve higher returns. Importantly, we intentionally keep
the framework as simple as possible, avoiding additional components such as external memory [13]
or extensive prompt engineering for summarization and reflection [20] that have been explored in
prior work, in order to isolate and highlight the sole effect ofmulti-episode meta-RL.
Our results provide strong evidence that such capability can emerge. After meta-training on a suite
of partially observable decision-making tasks, a relatively small open-source model (Qwen3-14B)
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Figure 2: Example of Multi-Episode Meta-RL for Enterprise Tool-Use. (Top) Standard RL typically
treats episodes as isolated events with state resets (tabula rasa), preventing the transfer of learned
environmental constraints (e.g., API schemas, rate limits) between trials. (Bottom) A Meta-RL
framework enables in-context adaptation across episodes. The agent accumulates a persistent
interaction history, allowing it to transition from probing unknown tools (Ep 1) to refining its
strategy based on errors (Ep 2), and finally exploiting the learned mental model (Ep 3) for reliable
execution, all without requiring weight updates.
exhibits substantially improved in-context online learning ability oncompletely unseenenvironments,
matching GPT-5.2 and outperforms traditional RL fine-tuning baselines (Fig. 1 and Fig. 3). We
further conduct scaling experiments and observe consistent gains as model size increases, suggesting
meaningful headroom for future progress. Overall, our findings highlight meta reinforcement learning
as a promising pathway toward general-purpose, online decision-making agents that can learn
effectively at inference time.
1.1 Related Work
The In-context Learning PhenomenonIn-context learning (ICL) was popularized by the GPT-3
technical report [2], which demonstrated that large language models can follow task instructions
from a small number of prompt demonstrations without parameter updates. Most subsequent
studies and practical deployments of ICL focus on few-shotinstruction followingunder static input–
output formats, often further reinforced by instruction tuning and preference-based post-training
methods [4, 12, 16]. Mechanistic analyses suggest that ICL may correspond to implicit optimization
implemented by the model’s forward pass [1, 26]. However, these settings typically do not require
agents to actively explore or adapt through ongoing interaction, which is the central challenge in
continual learning.
In-context Reinforcement LearningParallel to developments in language modeling, the rein-
forcement learning community has long pursued general-purpose RL algorithms. With the advent
of transformers [25], numerous works have attempted to train transformers as sequential decision-
making agents, most notably Decision Transformer [3]. A growing body of work studies in-context
reinforcement learning (ICRL) on classical RL benchmarks such as Atari, aiming to train sequence
models that adapt online from interaction histories [7, 8, 9, 18]. However, many of these approaches
train models from scratch or from narrow trajectory distributions, which limits their ability to gener-
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
alize to unseen tasks. In contrast, starting from a pretrained language model offers a strong semantic
and reasoning prior, motivating our focus on general-purpose in-context RL built on top of pretrained
LLMs.
In-context Online and Reinforcement Learning in Language ModelsRecent studies have
directly evaluated frontier LLMs as in-context online learners on canonical problems such as multi-
armed bandits, often finding brittle or inconsistent exploration behavior in the absence of targeted
training [5, 6, 10, 11, 15, 17, 21, 29]. Motivated by these limitations, several recent works aim to
improve the in-context RL capabilities of LLMs via post-training on self-generated interaction data.
Iterative RMFT Park et al. [14] uses regret-based trajectory selection followed by iterative supervised
fine-tuning, but is primarily evaluated in canonical multi-armed bandit settings. PAPRIKA [ 22]
constructs preference signals from sampled trajectories for multi-turn post-training and similarly
evaluates generalization to new tasks, but reports relatively weak performance on several environments
(e.g., 2% success rates on Mastermind). Closest to our approach is the concurrent meta-RL framework
of Yan et al. [27], whose objective can be viewed as a discounted variant of ours; however, their
evaluation focuses on environments identical to those seen during training, making it difficult to
isolate the effect of ICL vs memorizing the environment. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the first to demonstrate substantial and transferable improvements in in-context reinforcement
learning capability across diverse, unseen tasks.
2 In-context Reinforcement Learning
We model each task as a finite-horizon episodic Markov decision process (MDP)
M= (S,A, P, r, ρ, H),
where S and A are the state and action spaces, P(· |s, a) is the transition kernel, r(s, a) is the reward
function, ρ is the initial-state distribution, and H is the (per-episode) horizon. An episode begins with
se,0 ∼ρand proceeds for at mostHsteps, terminating early if a terminal state is reached.
In-context policies as online RL algorithms.We consider an LLM agent with parameters θ
that selects actions using only the interaction transcript stored in its context window. In episode
e∈ {1, . . . , T} and within-episode timestep t∈ {0, . . . , H−1} , the agent observes se,t and samples
an action
ae,t ∼π θ(· |h e,t),
whereh e,t denotes the full history available in context up to that point. Concretely, we can write
he,t =
 
τ (1), . . . , τ(e−1), se,0, ae,0, re,0, . . . , se,t

,
i.e., the concatenation of all prior episodes and the partial trajectory of the current episode. The
environment transitions as se,t+1 ∼P(· |s e,t, ae,t) and emits reward re,t =r(s e,t, ae,t). In this
view, an online RL algorithm is simply a (possibly randomized) mapping from histories to action
distributions; in-context reinforcement learning aims to realize such an algorithm through the LLM’s
forward pass, without any parameter updates at test time.
Multi-episode interaction protocol.To capture repeated trials of thesameunderlying task, we
evaluate the agent on T episodes of interaction with a fixed MDP M. Each episode resets the
environment (fresh se,0 ∼ρ ) while keeping (P, r) unchanged, and the agent retains the entire cross-
episode transcript in its context window. We summarize the protocol in Algorithm 1. Let τ (e) denote
the trajectory collected in episodee:
τ (e) = (se,0, ae,0, re,0, . . . , se,ℓe),
where ℓe ≤H allows for early termination. The full interaction trace across T episodes is the
concatenationτ= (τ (1), . . . , τ(T) ).
Evaluation via in-context regret across episodes.Let the return of episodeebe
G(e) =
ℓe−1X
t=0
re,t,withℓ e ≤H,
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Algorithm 1Multi-Episode Interaction Protocol
Require:Task MDPM= (S,A, P, r, ρ, H), number of episodesT, policyπ θ
Ensure:Cross-episode interaction traceτ
Initialize empty historyh←()
fore= 1...Tdo
s←env.reset()(samples∼ρ)
fort= 0...H−1do
Sample actiona∼π θ(· |h, s)
Executeaand observe next states ′ and rewardr=r(s, a)
Update historyh←(h, s, a, r, s ′)
s←s ′
ifsis terminalthen
break
end if
end for
end for
returnτ≡h
and define the total return overTepisodes as PT
e=1 G(e). Let
J ⋆(M) = max
π
E
"H−1X
t=0
r(st, at)
#
denote the optimal expected per-episode return on M (under the same initial-state distribution ρ and
dynamicsP). We define thein-context regretafterTepisodes as
RegT (M) =T·J ⋆(M)−E
" TX
e=1
G(e)
#
,
where the expectation is over the environment randomness (initial states and transitions) and the
agent’s action sampling.
A strong in-context online learner is one whose regret grows slowly with T , indicating that it quickly
extracts task-relevant information from early interaction and exploits it to achieve near-optimal
performance in later trials. Minimizing RegT (M) induces an exploration–exploitation trade-off
across episodes: actions in early episodes may sacrifice immediate reward to reduce uncertainty
about the task, while the resulting information—retained in the context window—can be exploited to
improve returns in subsequent episodes, all without any parameter updates.
3 ORBIT: Online Reinforcement-Based In-Context Training
To train a general-purpose in-context learning agent capable of solving diverse tasks on the fly, we
train the agent on a collection of tasks (e.g., Minesweeper and Blackjack) and evaluate it on a disjoint
set of unseen tasks (e.g., Mastermind and Maze). These tasks differ substantially in their underlying
dynamics, observation structures, and optimal solution strategies, such that naïvely transferring a
fixed policy or heuristic across tasks is ineffective; success therefore requires the agent to infer
task-specific structure and adapt its behavior through in-context interaction, effectively learning how
to learn within each new task.
During training, we sample a task M from the training task set M. The agent then interacts with
M for HT steps, generating a trajectory τ according to the multi-episode interaction protocol
(Alg. 1) and accumulating reward R(M;τ) . This training procedure can be viewed as a meta-level
reinforcement learning problem, where the objective is to learn a non-Markovian meta-policy
Π :h t 7→a t,
implemented by the LLM acting purely in context. The meta-learning objective is to maximize the
expected normalized cumulative reward—equivalently, to minimize regret—over the task distribution,
max
Π
EM∼M,Π[R(M;τ)].
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Table 1: Summary of training and test environments. All environments are partially observable. H
denotes the maximum number of steps per episode, and T denotes the number of episodes. All
training tasks use 512 instances, and all test tasks use 256 instances.
Environment Split Task DescriptionH T
RPS Train Infer opponent action distribution and adapt actions to maximize win rate 5 3
Minesweeper Train Infer hidden mines and reveal all safe cells under partial observability 8 3
Hangman Train Sequentially guess letters to uncover a hidden word with limited attempts 10 3
Wordle Train Infer a hidden word using structured feedback from each guess 10 3
Blackjack Train Infer deck composition to maximize expected return in a stochastic card game 4 3
Maze Test Explore an unknown map to reach a goal using local observations only 9 3
Mastermind Test Infer a hidden ordered sequence using structured feedback 3 3
3.1 Reward Design
To prevent reward hacking and ensure alignment with task completion, we define rewards at the
trajectory level based on the number of successful task completions within a trajectory. For each task
M, let GM ⊆ S denote the set of goal (terminal success) states, and define a success indicator at time
tas
I(M)
t =1{s t ∈ G M }.
We ignore any task-specific process rewards provided by the environment and instead use a unified
binary completion reward. This choice avoids scale-induced imbalances across tasks: if different tasks
exhibit heterogeneous reward magnitudes, tasks with larger intrinsic reward scales would dominate
the optimization signal and contribute disproportionately large gradients. Using a standardized 0−1
completion reward ensures balanced gradient contributions across tasks and focuses learning on
successful task completion rather than exploiting task-specific reward shaping.
The trajectory-level reward is then defined as the success count
R(M;τ) =
T−1X
t=0
I(M)
t ,
which measures how many times the agent successfully completes the task within the interaction
budget T . The corresponding meta-learning objective is to maximize the expected success count over
the task distribution,
max
Π
EM∼M, τ∼Π [R(M;τ)].
This objective encourages agents to reliably complete tasks rather than exploit dense or shaped reward
signals, and naturally supports episodic environments in which multiple task completions may occur
within a single trajectory.
3.2 Policy Optimization
We optimize the meta-policy Π using Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [19], a policy-
gradient method that operates directly on trajectory-level returns and avoids explicit value-function
estimation. This choice is closely aligned with our reward design, which is intrinsically sparse
and outcome-driven: reward is assigned only based on task completion within a trajectory, with no
intermediate or process-level supervision.
For each training task M∼ M , we sample a group of K trajectories {τ (k)}K
k=1 by rolling out
the current meta-policy Π in context. Each trajectory τ (k) is assigned a trajectory-level reward
R(M;τ (k)), defined as the total number of successful task completions within the trajectory. GRPO
computes a relative advantage for each trajectory by normalizing rewards within the group,
ˆA(k) =R(M;τ (k))− 1
K
KX
j=1
R(M;τ (j)),
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
which serves as a baseline for variance reduction.
LetΠ old denote the meta-policy before the update. We define the importance sampling ratio
r(k)
t = Π(a(k)
t |h (k)
t )
Πold(a(k)
t |h (k)
t )
,
and apply PPO-style clipped updates with asymmetric clipping bounds(ϵlow, ϵhigh) to stabilize training.
The resulting GRPO objective is
LGRPO(Π) =E M∼M
"
1
K
KX
k=1
T−1X
t=0
min

r(k)
t ˆA(k),clip

r(k)
t ,1−ϵ low,1 +ϵ high

ˆA(k)
#
.
A key property of GRPO is that it operates fundamentally at the level of complete trajectories
and does not maintain or learn an explicit value function. Consequently, it cannot reliably exploit
fine-grained or process-level reward signals that depend on intermediate states or partial progress
within a trajectory. Since group sampling, reward normalization, and advantage computation are all
performed over full trajectories, the learning signal depends only on relative differences in aggregated
trajectory outcomes. In this sense, GRPO is inherently outcome-driven: it compares trajectories
based on overall success rather than intermediate feedback.
While the inability to leverage dense process rewards may be a limitation in settings where such
signals are informative, it is well matched to our objective. Our reward design is intentionally sparse
and aligned with task completion, both to avoid reward hacking and to ensure balanced optimization
across heterogeneous tasks. Moreover, recent empirical evidence suggests that suppressing step-wise
credit assignment can be beneficial for reasoning-intensive settings. For example, the Kimi K1.5
technical report [ 24] observes that removing value-function-based credit assignment encourages
exploration of diverse reasoning paths, allowing models to recover from intermediate errors and
learn effective trial-and-error strategies from final outcomes alone. Although our setting differs,
this observation provides supporting intuition that outcome-level supervision can promote richer
in-context adaptation rather than prematurely constraining behavior based on local signals.
4 Experiments
4.1 Environments
Table 1 summarizes all training and test environments along with concise task descriptions. All
environments are partially observable in the sense that the environment parameters, such as the map
of the maze, is initially unknown to the agent. Successful completion of the task requires the agent to
balance exploration and exploitation. Detailed prompt designs and task specifications are provided in
Appendix A and Appendix B.
4.2 Experimental Setup
For most experiments in this paper, we use Qwen3-8B as the base model [28]. In the scaling study,
we additionally train agents on top of Qwen3-{4B, 8B, 14B} to examine how in-context learning
performance scales with model size. All base models have a maximum context length of 32,768
tokens. All experiments are implemented using the RLLM training framework [23].
The relatively limited context length of 32k tokens is a primary factor constraining the interaction
horizon in our experiments. To ensure that complete interaction histories can be preserved within
the context window, we restrict each task instance to three episodes per game. Extending this
framework to longer horizons is a natural direction for future work, particularly with larger-context
or memory-augmented models.
Training setup.During training, we use temperature 1.0 and top-p= 1.0 . Trajectories that exceed
this limit are truncated and assigned zero reward. For each training instance, we generate4 trajectories
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Figure 3: ORBITinduces genuine in-context learning beyond single-episode and multitask baselines.
Success rate versus episode index on unseen Maze (left) and Mastermind (right) tasks. We compare
ORBIT(8B) against the base model and RL baseline.
and use a batch size of 64 across all model sizes. Models are trained for 100 optimization steps with
a learning rate of 1×10 −6, using PPO-style clipped policy updates with asymmetric clipping bounds
(0.2,0.28) . Both entropy regularization and KL regularization are disabled. We enable the model’s
thinking mode during training. Due to limited computational resources, all comparison experiments
are conducted using Qwen3-8B; Only scaling law experiments include the 4B and 14B.
Training setup.During training, we use temperature 1.0 and top- p= 1.0 . Each trajectory is
generated subject to the 32k-token context limit; trajectories that exceed this limit are truncated and
assigned zero reward. For each training instance, we sample a group of K= 4 trajectories for GRPO
optimization. We use a batch size of64trajectories across all model sizes.
Models are trained for 100 optimization steps with a learning rate of 1×10 −6, using PPO-style
clipped policy updates with asymmetric clipping bounds (0.2,0.28) . Both entropy regularization and
KL regularization are disabled. We enable the model’s thinking mode during training to match the
inference-time configuration.
Evaluation setup.For Sections 4.3 and 4.4, we report results from the checkpoint obtained after 100
optimization steps. For Section 4.5, we instead report the best-performing checkpoint within the first
100 optimization steps, in order to reflect the full performance potential of ORBIT. Model checkpoints
are evaluated using the inference settings recommended for Qwen3 models, with temperature 0.6 and
top-p= 0.95. Thinking mode is enabled during evaluation to match the training configuration.
All evaluations are conducted on two test environments,MazeandMastermind, which are entirely
unseen during training and each comprise 256 distinct instances. This evaluation protocol is designed
to assess generalization beyond the training tasks. We intentionally do not evaluate on training tasks
or on intra-environment variants (e.g., Minesweeper with a larger board or Wordle with longer words),
as success rates in these settings typically saturate quickly and make it difficult to disentangle genuine
in-context adaptation from environment memorization. Focusing on entirely unseen task classes
therefore provides a cleaner evaluation of generalizable in-context reinforcement learning behavior.
4.3 ORBITLearns In Context
Figure 3 shows that ORBITinduces genuine in-context learning on the unseenMazeandMastermind
tasks. Compared to the base model, ORBIT(8B) achieves substantially higher success rates and,
critically, continues to improve across successive episodes. This consistent upward trend indicates
that the model effectively leverages interaction history stored in the context window to refine its
behavior online.
Crucially, ORBITalso consistently outperforms the standard RL post-training baseline, which is
trained on the same task distribution but optimized using single-episode completion rewards. While
this RL baseline yields modest improvements over the base model in early episodes, its performance
quickly saturates or even degrades as episodes progress, suggesting a limited capacity for in-context
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Table 2:Episode 3 success rate improvement over the base model.We report success rates in
Episode 3 on Maze and Mastermind, together with absolute improvements over the base model.
Task Method Ep 3 Success∆vs. Base
Maze RL0.45 +0.23
ORBIT0.55+0.33
Mastermind RL0.21−0.06
ORBIT0.59+0.32
adaptation. In contrast, ORBITexhibits monotonic improvement across episodes on both tasks,
highlighting its ability to adapt behavior based on feedback from previous interactions.
Table 2 further reinforces this distinction by focusing on performance in the third episode, after
the agent has accumulated interaction history within the same task instance. ORBITconsistently
outperforms both the base model and the RL baseline, whereas the RL baseline shows limited or
unstable gains once early episodes fail. This pattern suggests that ORBIT’s improvements are not
merely the result of stronger static task-solving policies learned during training, but instead arise
from its ability to adapt its behavior within a task using information from prior episodes.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that ORBITlearns an in-context policy that supports online
adaptation at inference time, enabling exploration and refinement across episodes without parameter
updates. This behavior distinguishes ORBITfrom conventional RL post-training approaches that
operate on isolated, single-episode rollouts, and underscores the effectiveness of our framework for
inducing in-context reinforcement learning in large language models.
4.4 ORBITLearns to Explore
Figure 4: A trace of ORBITin Maze. The agent observes only its local surroundings and must rely on
its history to guide decisions. The first two episodes (Ep 1 and Ep 2) fail to reach the goal, exploring
suboptimal paths. Leveraging reflections over past interactions, the agent adapts its strategy and, in
the third episode (Ep 3), follows a new route that successfully reaches the goal.
Figure 4 and, in particular, the snippet in Table 3 provide qualitative evidence that ORBITacquires an
exploration strategythrough in-context adaptationrather than relying on fixed heuristics or hand-
engineered prompting. In the partially observable maze, the agent observes only local surroundings
and must use the cross-episode transcript as its memory. After failing in Episodes 1–2, ORBITenters
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Table 3:Qualitative in-context “reflect and adapt” moment under ORBIT.The agent fails in the
first two episodes. In the third episode, it explicitly summarizes the failures from earlier interactions,
reflects on its accumulated history, and selects actions that differ from previous attempts.
Env
New episode begins.You are a maze-solving agent. Your goal is to navigate from the START
position to the GOAL position in the fewest turns possible. You are at the START position (4,1) .
Around you, up leads to path, down leads to path, left leads to wall, and right leads to wall. Output
your next move from up/down/left/right within\boxed{}.
ORBIT
<think> . . . In Episode 1, I went up three times, then right and down, but got stuck. In Episode 2, I
went down first and explored the bottom corridor, but that also led to a loop.</think>up
ORBIT
<think> . . . Previously, I went up again from here and failed to reach the goal. This time, I will
explore right instead.</think>right
[agent moves up, right, right, up, right]
Env
Congratulations!You arrived at the goal.
Table 4:Exploration under failure. ∆States (Ep2|F1) denotes the number of newly explored states
in Episode 2 conditioned on failure in Episode 1, and ∆States (Ep3|F1–2) denotes the number of
newly explored states in Episode 3 conditioned on failure in both Episodes 1 and 2. Results are
collected using Qwen3-8B.
Method∆States (Ep2|F1)∆States (Ep3|F1–2)
Base1.64 0.94
RL4.11 1.27
ORBIT4.69 1.48
Episode 3 and spontaneously performs behaviors commonly associated with deliberative exploration:
itreflectson what went wrong, summarizes the relevant parts of the interaction history, and then
chooses actions designed to gather new information instead of replaying the same trajectory.
Crucially, these behaviors are not prescribed by an explicit “reflect” instruction or an auxiliary module:
they emerge from optimizing the multi-episode meta-RL objective alone. When faced with the same
local observation, ORBITselects actions that intentionally differ from earlier episodes (Table 3),
indicating genuinely history-dependent decision making. This shift leads the agent to actively explore
a previously unvisited route and successfully reach the goal (Fig. 4).
Beyond the qualitative trace, Table 4 provides quantitative evidence that ORBITchanges its explo-
ration behaviorconditioned on failure. We measure how manynewstates are visited in later episodes
given that the agent failed earlier: ∆States (Ep2|F1) counts newly explored states in Episode 2 condi-
tioned on failure in Episode 1, while ∆States (Ep3|F1–2) counts newly explored states in Episode 3
conditioned on failure in both Episodes 1 and 2. Under this conditioning, an effective online learner
should avoid repeating unproductive behaviors and instead actively expand coverage of the state
space to reduce uncertainty. ORBITconsistently explores more new states than the single-episode
RL baseline, suggesting that it learns to “try something different” after failure rather than cycling
through the same local choices.
Taken together, the qualitative evidence (Table 3, Fig. 4) and the quantitative analysis (Table 4)
indicate that ORBITlearns an adaptive exploration policy in-context: it can perform reflection-like
summarization and active exploration strategies on its own, using only the interaction history stored
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Figure 5: In-context learning across episodes on unseen test tasks. Success rate versus episode index
for Maze (left) and Mastermind (right) when evaluating Qwen3-4B, 8B, 14B trained with ORBIT.
We report the best-performing checkpoint in terms of success rate of episode 3 within the first 100
training steps to highlight ORBIT’s potential.
in the context window, and improves across episodes without any parameter updates at inference
time.
4.5 ORBITScales with Model Size
Figure 5 reveals a consistent benefit from scaling the Qwen3 backbone from 4B to 8B to 14B on
the unseen Maze and Mastermind benchmarks, with the largest gains appearing in later episodes. In
particular, Episode 3 improves the most with model size, followed by Episode 2, while Episode 1
shows only modest improvement (and can even drop for 14B).
This pattern is consistent with the interpretation that larger ORBITmodels may allocate early
interaction more toward information gathering (exploration) rather than immediate task completion
(exploitation), and then capitalize on the accumulated cross-episode evidence in later attempts.
Overall, scaling model capacity appears to amplify—rather than replace—the multi-episode in-
context learning dynamics induced by ORBIT.
5 Discussion and Future Work
This work primarily demonstrates the feasibility of using meta reinforcement learning as a mechanism
for inducing generalizable ICRL capabilities, while leaving substantial room for further improvement.
Importantly, we intentionally keep the framework as simple as possible, avoiding additional compo-
nents such as external memory, retrieval-augmented generation, or extensive prompt engineering for
summarization and reflection that have been explored in prior work, in order to isolate and highlight
the contribution ofmulti-episode meta learningalone. Our experiments are limited to relatively
short interaction horizons due to the 32k-token context length of the Qwen-3 base model; extending
training to longer horizons, either with larger-context models or memory-augmented architectures,
would enable richer temporal reasoning and more effective long-term credit assignment. In addition,
we train on only five environments, and scaling both the number and diversity of training environ-
ments is a natural next step toward understanding empirical scaling laws governing generalization.
There is also significant potential to improve the computational efficiency and stability of the training
procedure through more advanced optimization and credit-assignment techniques.
References
[1] Kwangjun Ahn, Xinyi Cheng, Hadi Daneshmand, and Suvrit Sra. Transformers learn to
implement preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning. InAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
[2] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
Herbert-V oss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2005.14165.
[3] Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter
Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning
via sequence modeling.Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097,
2021.
[4] Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B. Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences.arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03741, 2017.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03741.
[5] Nicolò Felicioni, Lucas Maystre, Seth Ghiassian, and Kamil Ciosek. On the importance of
uncertainty in decision-making with large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02649,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02649.
[6] Akshay Krishnamurthy, Keegan Harris, Dylan J. Foster, Cyril Zhang, and Aleksandrs Slivkins.
Can large language models explore in-context?arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15371, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15371.
[7] Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie Steiger-
wald, DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, Maxime Gazeau, Himanshu
Sahni, Satinder Singh, and V olodymyr Mnih. In-context reinforcement learning with algorithm
distillation. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14215.
[8] Jonathan N Lee, Annie Xie, Aldo Pacchiano, Yash Chandak, Chelsea Finn, Ofir Nachum, and
Emma Brunskill. Supervised pretraining can learn in-context reinforcement learning.Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[9] Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Transformers as decision makers: Provable in-context
reinforcement learning via supervised pretraining. InThe Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=yN4Wv17ss3.
[10] Giovanni Monea, Antoine Bosselut, Kianté Brantley, and Yoav Artzi. Llms are in-context bandit
reinforcement learners.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05362, 2024.
[11] Allen Nie, Yi Su, Bo Chang, Jonathan N. Lee, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V . Le, and Minmin Chen.
EVOLvE: Evaluating and optimizing LLMs for exploration.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06238,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06238.
[12] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano,
Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.0
2155.
[13] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonza-
lez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. 2023.
[14] Chanwoo Park, Ziyang Chen, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Kaiqing Zhang. Post-training LLMs as bet-
ter decision-making agents: A regret-minimization approach.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04393,
2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04393.
[15] Chanwoo Park, Xiangyu Liu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Kaiqing Zhang. Do llm agents have
regret? a case study in online learning and games. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
[16] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and
Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward
model. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290.
[17] Nate Rahn, Pierluca D’Oro, and Marc G Bellemare. Controlling large language model agents
with entropic activation steering.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00244, 2024.
[18] Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Eric Hambro, Robert Kirk, Mikael Henaff, and Roberta Raileanu.
Generalization to new sequential decision making tasks with in-context learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.03801, 2023.
[19] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li,
Yu Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open
language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[20] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
[21] Jiahang Sun, Zhiyong Wang, Runhan Yang, Chenjun Xiao, John Lui, and Zhongxiang Dai.
Large language model-enhanced multi-armed bandits.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01118, 2025.
[22] Fahim Tajwar, Yiding Jiang, Abitha Thankaraj, Sumaita Sadia Rahman, J. Zico Kolter, Jeff
Schneider, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Training a generally curious agent.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.17543, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17543.
[23] Sijun Tan, Michael Luo, Colin Cai, Tarun Venkat, Kyle Montgomery, Aaron Hao, Tianhao
Wu, Arnav Balyan, Manan Roongta, Chenguang Wang, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion
Stoica. rllm: A framework for post-training language agents. https://pretty-radio-b75
.notion.site/rLLM-A-Framework-for-Post-Training-Language-Agents-21b81
902c146819db63cd98a54ba5f31, 2025. Notion Blog.
[24] Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li,
Chenjun Xiao, Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, et al. Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement
learning with llms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12599, 2025.
[25] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[26] Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Emanuele Randazzo, João Sacramento, Alexander
Mordvintsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context by
gradient descent. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
[27] Minghao Yan, Bo Peng, Benjamin Coleman, Ziqi Chen, Zhouhang Xie, Zhankui He, Noveen
Sachdeva, Isabella Ye, Weili Wang, Chi Wang, et al. Pacevolve: Enabling long-horizon
progress-aware consistent evolution.arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10657, 2026.
[28] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[29] Ziyuan Zhang, Darcy Wang, Ningyuan Chen, Rodrigo Mansur, and Vahid Sarhangian. Compar-
ing exploration-exploitation strategies of llms and humans: Insights from standard multi-armed
bandit tasks.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09901, 2025.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
A Prompts
System Prompt
You are solving the same task across multiple episodes with a fixed total step budget. Each
episode resets the environment but keeps the task identical. Leverage information gathered
from earlier episodes to succeed faster. Respond with actions inside \\box{} each turn.
Prompt for Minesweeper
You are playing the Minesweeper game. The objective of the game is to reveal all cells that do
not contain mines. To make a move, you can either reveal a cell or place a flag on a suspected
mine location using one of the following commands:
- ’reveal’: Reveal the contents of a specific cell.
- ’flag’: Place or remove a flag on a specific cell to mark it as a potential mine.
To submit your move, type the command followed by the row and column in \\box{} .
For example:
- \\box{reveal 4 4} to reveal the cell in Row 4, Column 4.
- \\box{flag 2 2} to place or remove a flag on the cell in Row 2, Column 2.
The current board layout is shown below. Cells that are unrevealed are represented by a dot
(’.’), revealed numbers show the count of adjacent mines, and flagged cells are marked with
an ’F’.
Use logic and deduction to avoid revealing cells with mines! Be mindful not to choose
revealed or flagged cells.
Here is the current board layout:
0 1 2 3 4
0 . . . . .
1 . . . . .
2 . . . . .
3 . . . . .
4 . . . . .
Enter your guess.
Prompt for Hangman
You are playing Hangman. The objective of the game is to guess the 3-letter word by
providing one letter guesses or the entire word.
The cells that need to be populated with letters are represented by ’_’.
There are two ways you can answer. You can provide one letter guesses in the format of
\\box{TOE}, or you can guess the entire word in the format of \\box{Y}.
If the given letter is in the word, it will be revealed in the grid.
If the given word is correct, you win.
As you play, the history of your choices will be appended below. Use the information to
figure out the word and win.
Some rules:
1. You can only guess one letter/word at a time.
2. You have to win within 10 turns.
Here is the current state of the Hangman grid:
C00 C01 C02
_ _ _
Enter your guess.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prompt for Blackjack
You are an agent playing a simplified game of Blackjack against a dealer.
Game Objective:
Your goal is to choose actions that maximize your chance of winning against the dealer.
- The objective is to get a hand value as close to 21 as possible without exceeding 21.
- If your hand value exceeds 21, you bust and immediately lose.
- After you stand, the game ends and your hand is compared with the dealer’s hand.
Card Values:
- Number cards (2–10): face value
- Face cards (J, Q, K): value 10
- Ace (A): value 1 or 11, chosen to give the highest possible hand value not exceeding 21
Dealer Rules:
- The dealer has exactly two cards.
- One dealer card is visible and the other is hidden.
- The dealer does not draw any additional cards.
- The dealer’s hand value is computed using the same Ace rule as the player.
Initial Observation:
At the start of the episode, you observe:
1. Dealer’s hand:
- One visible card and one hidden card
- Example: Dealer cards: [4, ?]
2. Your hand:
- A list of cards currently held
- Example: Your cards: [10, 6]
3. Deck:
- A list of remaining cards indexed by position
- Unknown card identities are hidden
- Example: Deck: [0: ?, 1: ?, 2: ?, 3: ?, 4: ?, ...]
Available Actions:
At each step, you must choose exactly one of the following actions:
- Hit: draw a specific card from the deck hit <card_index >
- Stand: stop drawing cards and end the game stand
Action Output Format:
You must output your action in exactly one line, using the following format:
- Hit example: \\box{hit 9}
- Stand example: \\box{stand}
Important constraints:
- Output only the boxed action.
- Do not include explanations, reasoning, or additional text.
- Do not output multiple actions.
Now Begin:
Given the current observation, decide your next action and output it in the required format.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Prompt for RockPaperScissors
You are playing a multi-turn Rock-Paper-Scissors game against an adversary.
In each episode, at every turn, the adversary’s action is sampled from a fixed (hidden)
distribution determined by the seed.
Your objective is to choose the action that maximizes the probability of winning against this
hidden distribution each turn.
Now let’s start the game. Output your action within \\box{...}.
Prompt for Wordle
You are playing Wordle.
You have to guess the secret 5-letter word within 10 turns.
After you enter your guess, I will say mark your guess as follows:
- G (green): correct letter in the correct position
- Y (yellow): letter exists in the word but in the wrong position
- X (wrong): letter is not in the word
After thinking, format your final answer inside \\box{...}, for example, CRANE.
As you play, the history of your guesses will be appended below. Use the information to
complete the game before you run out of guesses.
Prompt for Mastermind
You are playing Mastermind.
You have to guess the secret 3 digit code within 3 turns.
The code consists of digits from 1 to 6 (inclusive).
Duplicate numbers are ’not allowed’.
After you enter your guess, I will say mark your guess with black and white pegs, where a
black peg indicates a correct digit in the correct position, while a white peg indicates a correct
digit in the wrong position.
After thinking, format your final answer inside \\box{...}, for example, \\box{1 4 6}.
As you play, the history of your guesses will be appended below. Use the information to
complete the game before you run out of guesses.
Enter your first guess to start the game.
Prompt for Maze
You are a maze-solving agent. Your goal is to navigate from the START position to the GOAL
position in the fewest turns possible. You are at the START position. {observation}
Output your next move from up/down/left/right within \\box{}.
B Task Rules
We use seven games for either training or evaluation: Minesweeper, Hangman, Rock–Paper–Scissors,
Wordle, Blackjack, Mastermind, and Maze. The rules of each game are summarized below.
B.1 Minesweeper
Minesweeper is a grid-based puzzle game in which some cells contain hidden mines. Revealing
a safe cell displays the number of mines in its eight neighboring cells. If a revealed safe cell has
zero neighboring mines, all adjacent cells are automatically revealed, potentially triggering further
expansions. The objective is to reveal all non-mine cells without revealing any mine; players may
place flags to mark suspected mine locations. The game ends either when a mine is revealed (failure)
or when all safe cells have been successfully uncovered (success).
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
B.2 Hangman
Hangman is a word-guessing game in which a target word is selected and initially concealed, with
each letter represented by a placeholder. On each turn, the player guesses a single letter. If the
guessed letter appears in the word, all corresponding positions are revealed; otherwise, the number
of remaining attempts is reduced by one. The objective is to fully reveal the target word before the
attempt limit is exhausted.
ExampleSuppose the hidden word is APPLE. A guess of A reveals A _ _ _ _ . A subsequent
guess of P reveals A P P _ _ . An incorrect guess, such as Z, does not reveal any letters and
consumes one attempt. The game continues until the word is fully revealed or the attempt limit is
reached.
B.3 Wordle
Wordle is a word deduction game in which a target word is selected and must be identified within
a fixed number of attempts. On each turn, the player submits a word guess and receives feedback
for each letter, indicating whether it is correct and in the correct position, correct but in an incorrect
position, or absent from the target word. The objective is to deduce the target word before the attempt
limit is reached.
ExampleSuppose the hidden word is PLACE. A guess of ALIEN receives feedback indicating that L
is correct and in the correct positions, A and E are correct but in the wrong position, and I and N are
absent from the word.
B.4 Mastermind
Mastermind is a code-breaking game in which a hidden sequence of numbers is randomly initialized.
On each turn, the player submits a complete sequence as a guess and receives structured feedback.
The number of black balls indicates how many numbers are correct and in the correct positions, while
the number of white balls indicates how many numbers are correct but placed in incorrect positions.
The objective is to identify the hidden sequence within a fixed maximum number of attempts.
ExampleSuppose the hidden code is (1, 2, 3). A guess of (1, 3, 4) receives feedback of one black
ball (since 1 is in the correct position) and a white ball (since 3 is correct but not in the correct
position).
B.5 Maze
Maze is a randomly initialized grid-world environment consisting of a starting position, walls, and a
goal. Each instance is constructed such that the shortest path from the start to the goal lies within a
pre-specified length range. At each step, the player observes only the four adjacent grid cells and
selects an action to move within the maze. The episode is successful if the player reaches the goal
within a fixed maximum number of steps; otherwise, it is considered a failure.
B.6 Rock-Paper-Scissors
Rock–Paper–Scissors is a repeated game in which the player competes against an adversary with a
fixed stochastic policy. An episode consists of multiple rounds. In each round, both the player and
the adversary simultaneously choose one of three actions: rock, paper, or scissors. At the end of the
episode, the player is declared the winner if they win more than half of the rounds; otherwise, the
episode is considered a failure.
B.7 Blackjack
Blackjack is a traditional card game. We consider a simplified setting in which the dealer is dealt two
cards, one hidden and one revealed. The player also starts with two cards and may repeatedly choose
whether to draw an additional card from the deck or to stop. Once the player stops drawing, the sum
of the player’s cards is compared with the dealer’s. The player wins if their sum is greater than the
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
0 25 50 75 100
training step
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4reward
Maze
ORBIT 14B
ORBIT 8B
ORBIT 4B
RL 8B
0 25 50 75 100
training step
1
2
3
4
Mastermind
Figure 6: Validation reward versus training step on the unseen Maze (left) and Mastermind (right).
Curves correspond to ORBIT models of different scales and a single-episode RL baseline.
dealer’s without exceeding 21; otherwise, the player loses. If the player’s card sum exceeds 21 at any
point, the episode immediately ends in a loss.
C Oracle design
For the maze task, we implement a finite-horizon value-iteration oracle that plans on an incrementally
constructed belief map aggregated from all previous observations. At each step, the oracle performs
Bellman backups with memorization over the planning horizon, conditioned on the agent’s current
position and accumulated observation history. The reward function assigns 100 to wall collisions,
−0.1 to revisiting known path cells, 100 to reaching the goal, and 1 to entering previously unvisited
cells. This reward shaping incentivizes exploration for shortest-path discovery.
For the Mastermind task, we formulate the problem as a finite-horizon dynamic program over belief
states that compactly encode the entire action–observation history, and obtain the optimal oracle via
exhaustive enumeration of all possible guesses and feedback outcomes.
D Validation Reward Curves on Unseen Tasks
Figure 6 reports validation reward (success count) as a function of training step on the unseen Maze
and Mastermind tasks.
E Additional Experimental Details
All models are trained on a single node with 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. For OpenAI model evalu-
ation, we use gpt-5.2-2025-12-11 with high reasoning effort, and gpt-4o-2024-08-06 with
temperature0.6and top-p= 0.95.
18